---
layout: post
title:  "AsyncJS"
date: Fri August 22, 2014 5:17 PM
categories: journal
---

Much like what `lodash`/`underscore` do for synchronous programming, in terms of simplifying collection iterations and providing useful utilities, `async` does for *asynchronous* programming.  In addition, due to the nature of asynchronous programming, `async` also provides mechanisms for performing flow control, e.g. running tasks in series, in parallel, in priority queues, etc.

To use the `async` library, just `npm install async` in your project, and `require('async')` in the module.

`async` library is purely *callback based*, so at every iteration of your iterator function, you have to invoke iterator callback. 

Most iterators receive a `iteratorCallback(err, [result])` parameter that **must** be invoked with at least an `error` parameter (or `null` if there's no error), and optional `result`.  

Other methods, e.g. `filter`, just have an iterator callback of `iteratorCallback(result)` - i.e. not `err` parameter.  

The `finalCallback` (called after the asynchronous tasks have completed) is invoked automatically by `async`, and its signature depends on the particular method of `async`.  

`async` library is designed to use NodeJS callback signature of `cb(err, result)` in general, or `cb(boolean)` for truth tests (e.g. `fs.exists`).  So, to return from a method with no error, you **have** to invoke the iterator callback with `cb(null, [result])` or `cb(true|false)`

In all the collection methods, if you pass in a *method* of an object as the iterator, and you want the method to execute in that object's context, then you **have** to bind the method to the object as follows: `async.<method>(collection, obj.method.bind(obj), cb)`. Otherwise, the method will execute as a function in global object scope 

> **A note on failures** - If a failure occurs at an iteration step in the middle of parallel processing of a collection, then the final callback will be invoked immediately, but *the remaining items of the collection will still run through* and the callback will not be invoked again.  This means that one needs to pay attention to functions with side effect, as there may be some ambiguity as to whether or not those remaining fuctions completed successfully.  In the series case, processing stops immediately so there is no such ambiguity.

### <a href="https://github.com/caolan/async#collections" target="_blank">Collections</a>

The most general for of the `async` library's *Collection* iteration function has the form:

<pre>
 async.method( collection,
               limit
               iterator(item, 
                        iteratorCallback( err, 
                                          result)
                                         ),
               finalCallback(err, results)
              );
</pre>

As seen below, there are five different forms that can group all the functions.

The following lists all the functions, broken up into the first group which run normally in *Parallel* but may have *Series* versions, and the second which only runs in *Series*.

* `each`<sup>**</sup>, `map`<sup>**</sup>, `filter`<sup>*</sup>, `reject`<sup>*</sup>, `detect`<sup>*</sup>, `concat`<sup>*</sup> `sortBy`, `some`, `every`
* `reduce`, `reduceRight`

<sub><sup>*</sup> These normally iterate in parallel (don't stop on error), but their "Series" version runs in series and will stop processing on error.</sub><br>
<sub><sup>**</sup> These have a "Limit" version as well, so only a limited number of iterators will run simultaneously - e.g. to control maximum memory consumption</sub><br>

#### Fiddles and Examples
The following fiddles cover the various combinations of iterators and callbacks.  All the functions under *Collections* fall in one of these signature.

* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/su4t0qo1/" target="_blank">`each(array, iterator(item, cb(err, result)), callback(err))`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/0ofu0dps/" target="_blank">`eachLimit(array, limit, iterator(item, cb(err, result)), callback(err))`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/neodfp9d/" target="_blank">`map(array, iterator(item, cb(err, result)), callback(err, results))`</a> 
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/xyawL25k/" target="_blank">`filter(array, iterator(item, cb(boolean)), callback(results))`</a> 
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/t718to8s/" target="_blank">`reduce(array, init, iterator(memo, item, cb(err, boolean)), callback(err, result))`</a> 
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/j7rg026t/" target="_blank">`sortBy(array, iterator(item, cb(err, sortValue)), callback(err, results))`</a> 

### <a href="https://github.com/caolan/async#control-flow-1" target="_blank">Flow Control</a>

I definitely find this part of the library to be the most challenging, because it is so different from the way I've been thinking about asynchronous programming - it's a lot more *functional*.  There are methods to run functions in series with or without parameter passing from one to the next, to compose functions by feeding output of one to the next and the next, to run functions in parallel
  
To summarize, I group the flow control methods in the following general groups:

* Run a set of functions one after the other / in series
    * `series`, `waterfall`, `compose`/`seq`, `applyEachSeries`, `timesSeries`
* Run a set of functions concurrently / in parallel
    * `applyEach`, `parallel`/`parallelLimit`, `queue`/`priorityQueue`, `cargo`, `times`
* Let async decide when to run what
    * `auto`
* Call a given async function repeatedly / in a loop
    * `whilst`/`doWhilst`, `until`/`doUntil`, `forever`, `retry`    
* Convenience methods
    * `nextTick`, `apply`, `iterator`


#### Fiddles and Examples
Here, we present some examples of the various functions in `async` flow control.

* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/48e4h0po/" target="_blank">`series(taskArray(cb(err, result)), [callback(err, results)] )`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/bcp4jpgf/" target="_blank">`parallel(taskArray(cb(err, result)), [callback(err, results)] )`</a> 
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/vvj8ptgL/" target="_blank">`parallelLimit(taskArray(cb(err, result)), limit, [callback(err, result)] )`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/0ftu80br/" target="_blank">`whilst(test, task(cb(err)), [callback(err)] )`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/tk15zpje/" target="_blank">`waterfall(taskArray(cb(err, [params])), [callback(err, result)] )`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/7L8uj1s0/" target="_blank">`compose|seq(taskArray(cb(err, [params])), [callback(err, result)] )`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/pqk4722y/" target="_blank">`applyEach(taskArray(data, cb(err, result)), arg, [callback(err)] )`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/eoe539q8/" target="_blank">`retry([numTry|5], task(cb(err, result), data), [callback(err, result)] )`</a>


    
The other, incredibly useful, methods of `async` - these are two complicated to be written up in a simple fiddle, and I will have to write them up separately:

* `queue` - create a task queue with a given number of workers able to run tasks in parallel. If all workers are busy, tasks are queued until one becomes available.
* `priorityQueue` - same as `queue`, but allows to provide prioritization to a single or an array of tasks.
* `cargo` - creates a singel worker that can carry out a given number of parallel tasks, up to some given limit. If worker has reached the indicated limit in the number of tasks, then tasks are queued until worker is freed.
* `auto` - determines based on inter-dependency of tasks, which to execute next, executing a task as soon as its requirements are fulfilled

And finally, some [not so] simple utility and helper functions, used internally by `async`, but published externally.

* `apply` - creates a continuation function with some arguments already applied.
* `iterator` - creates an iterator which calls the next function in its task list when a given task is completed

### <a href="https://github.com/caolan/async#utils" target="_blank">Utilities</a>

Utilities functions in `async` are pretty basic. There is support for
* `log`, and `dir` to log the results of async calls
* `memoize` and `unmemoize`
* `noConflict`, in case someone is already using the `async` name ?!