---
layout: post
title:  "Q"
date: Mon August 25, 2014 12:23 PM
categories: journal
---

Promises are objects that represent the eventual value of an asynchronous operation - be that a value or an exeption.  Promises may be *resolved* or remain *pending* indefinitely, in which case an external timeout mechanism is needed to declare the promise *rejected*.  A *resolved* promise can either provide a return value of the operation, *fulfillment* value, or a thrown exception, *rejection*.

> Resolution of a promise is guaranteed to be asynchronous, i.e. not occur before the `process.nextTick` in NodeJS. This guarantees that the `then` method below will *always* return before before either the *fulfillment* or *rejection* handler is executed.

#### Basic Operation
The `then` method of a promise is the key behind its operation, and is used to obtain the resolution of the promise and return a new promise:
{% highlight javascript %}
    var outputPromise = getInputPromise()
        .then( [function(input) {
                    // fulfillment handler
               }], 
               [function (reason) {
                    // rejection handler
               }],
               [function (progress) {
                    // progress handler
               }],               
             );
{% endhighlight %}

If the input promise returned by `getInputPromise()` is *fullfilled*, then the fulfillment handler will be invoked.  If it is *rejected*, then the rejection handler will be invoked.  Either way, the resolution of outputPromise depends entirely on what that handler does.  It can:

1. Return a promise : `outputPromise` now references that returned promise
2. Return a value : `outputPromise` will be *resolved* with that value, and its `then` method will invoke its *fulfillment* handler with that value
3. Throw an exception : `outputPromise` will be *rejected* with the provided exception

As indicated above, one or the other of the *fulfillment* and *rejection* handler may be omitted.  If the *fulfillment* handler is omitted, the resolution of `inputPromise` will transfer the returned value to `outputPromise`. Similarly, an exception thrown by `inputPromise`, in absence of a *rejection* handler will get transferred to `outputPromise` - i.e. it will be rejected and its *rejection* handler invoked.

#### promise.fail()
Q takes advantage of the above behavior to build a `fail` method to catch the error in a single location.  *Rejection* of any promise returned by one of the *then* methods below will propogate down the chain until it hits the `fail` method where it will be caught.  `.fail` is just a shortcut for `promise.then(null, function() { // rejection handler });`.

{% highlight javascript %}
    var outputPromise = getInputPromise()
        .then( promisedStep1 )
        .then( promisedStep2 )
        .then( promisedStep3 )
        .then( function(input) {
                    // fulfillment handler for entire chain
               })                
        .fail( function(cause) {
                    // rejection handler for any failure
               });
{% endhighlight %}


#### promise.done()
Since resolution handlers trap errors, any error thrown by the final resolution handler in a chain risks going unobserved unless
1. the output promise is assigned to a new reference
2. the promise chain is terminated with `.done()`

#### promise.fin() / promise.finally()

Q promises have a method that is *always* invoked at the end of a promise chain, regardless of resolution, so that clean up code can be guaranteed to run.  This is the `fin()` or `finally()` method, and is used as follows:
{% highlight javascript %}
    var outputPromise = getInputPromise()
        .then( promisedStep1 )
        .then( promisedStep2 )
        .then( promisedStep3 )
        .then( function(input) {
                    // fulfillment handler for entire chain
               })                
        .fail( function(cause) {
                    // rejection handler for any failures in the chain
               })
        .done( function(cause) {
                    // catch any last errors in the final handler
               })
        .fin( function(cause) {
                    // clean up code
               })
{% endhighlight %}

#### promise.progress()
This is just a shortcut for defining the third parameter in a promise's `then` method.  It gets notified by a *deferred* object's `deferred.notify(value)` method to update the progress of an asynchronous call.


#### Q.all()
Given an array of promises, e.g. returned by `[ f1(), f2(), f3(), .. ]`, where each function returns a promise, we can turn it into a single promise for the entire array with `var outputPromise = Q.all([f1(), f2(), f3()])`.  Now, `outputPromise` will only resolve when *ALL* of the promises in the array have resolved.

#### Q.spread()
A promise, as the eventual return value of a function invocation, can resolve to an array.  *This is called a promise for an array, not to be confused with an array of promises seen above*.  We can pass this array in whole to the next promise-returning function, or we can `spread` the values of the array over the arguments of the function as follows:

{% highlight javascript %}
Q.spread([ promise1, promise2, ..], 
           function(a, b, ..) {
               // a has fulfillment value of promise1
               // b has fulfillment value of promise2
               // etc..
           } );
{% endhighlight %}

> `Q.spread` first calls `Q.all`, to turn the array of promises into a promise for the whole, then passes the fulfillment values to the function.


### [Interfacing with nodeJS - API](https://github.com/kriskowal/q/wiki/API-Reference#interfacing-with-nodejs-callbacks)

Q has specific method for interfacing with node js style <code>callback(err, result)</code> functions.

* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/h7d0y6rk/" target="_blank">`Q.nfbind(nodeFunction,[args])`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/h7d0y6rk/" target="_blank">`Q.nbind(nodeFunction, thisArg, [args])`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/h7d0y6rk/" target="_blank">`Q.nfApply(nodeFunction,args)`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/h7d0y6rk/" target="_blank">`Q.nfCall(nodeFunction,[args])`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/h7d0y6rk/" target="_blank">`Q.nfPost(nodeFunction, methodName, args)`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/h7d0y6rk/" target="_blank">`Q.ninvoke(nodeFunction, methodName, [args])`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/h7d0y6rk/" target="_blank">`Q.nodeify(callback)`</a>
* <a href="http://jsfiddle.net/caasjj/h7d0y6rk/" target="_blank">`Q.makeNodeResolver()`</a>

### References
[1] [You're Missing the Point of Promises](http://domenic.me/2012/10/14/youre-missing-the-point-of-promises/) - Domenic Denicola<br>
[2] [On Exceptions](https://github.com/kriskowal/q/wiki/On-Exceptions) - Kris Kowal<br>
[3] [Promises/A+ spec](http://promisesaplus.com/) - 